So we've previously looked at operator precedence,
but I want to talk now about operator associativity.
So an expression is a construct
that evaluates to a single value.
Now, expressions are constructed,
as we know, from operands and operators,
and we've seen that in the last section.
The operators in an expression indicate
which operations to apply to the operands.
And the order of evaluation of operators
is an expression determined by the precedence,
but also by the associativity of the operators.
So we have talked about operator precedence
in the last section, and as a brief recap,
precedence is the priority order of an operator.
In other words, what order
Java processes operators in an expression.
But what is associativity?
Well, associativity is the direction
of execution of operators and can be either
left to right or right to left.
If consecutive operators in an expression
have the same precedence, associativity is used
to decide the order in which those operators are evaluated.
And as I mentioned, an operator
can be left-associative or right-associative.
Now technically, an operator can be non-associative,
but we won't discuss that at this point.
So, left-associative operators of the same precedence
are evaluated in order from left to right in an expression.
Now for example, addition and subtraction
have the same precedence and they are left-associative.
So in this example expression, 16 minus eight plus five,
the subtraction is done first,
and that's because it's to the left
of the addition operator,
and the addition operator is left-associative.
So this is what left-associative effectively means here.
Now, right-associative operators, on the other hand,
of the same precedence are evaluated
in order from right to left.
For example, the assignment operator is right-associative.
So consider the following code fragment.
So, int numberTrucks equals five,
int numberCars equals seven,
int fleetCount equals numberTrucks plus numberCars.
So the expression to the right of the equal sign
is evaluated first in order to know what value to store
in the variable on the left of the equal sign.
So equals, or the assignment operator,
is right-associative for that reason.
So what's on the right hand side of the operator,
the equals operator or the assignment operator,
is right-associative.
Right, so let's go back to our operator precedence page
which we've seen from the last section again, in a browser.
All right, so I'll just paste that link in.
And again, it's always in the resources section.
Now as you can see, the table here
also talks about the associativity for each operator.
So we can see that looking down at the assignment operator,
down here, right down the bottom,
you can see that it says to the right hand side,
in the table, it's right to left.
And that right most column is the associativity column.
So it's telling us that it's basically
evaluated right to left.
And you can see that there's a few other ones there
that are also right to left in that same category,
plus equals, minus equals, multiplied equal,
divided by equal, and modulus assignment,
the modulus equal.
Generally, with associativity,
it's not something you need to really understand too deep,
and most of it should be fairly intuitive.
But let's swing back now quickly to IntelliJ
and just type in a few examples to hopefully clarify this.
Alright, so I'm in the same project as per the last video.
All right, so if we wanted to create an expression
to convert miles into kilometres,
we'd need to know firstly that a mile
was equal to 1.609344 kilometres.
And if you wanted then to figure out
what 100 miles were converted to kilometres,
we'd type something like double kilometres
is equal to parentheses 100d,
being the number of miles we want to convert,
multiplied by the literal value of 1.603944d,
and that's the calculation to convert miles to kilometres.
And just as a recap, the actual expression
is the entire line minus the data type
and minus the semicolon, we've talked about that previously.
And yes, the expression includes
the left hand side of the equal sign.
Now, of course, the code in parentheses
is also an expression in its own right, as well.
But a quick challenge here,
is the assignment operator equals here?
Is it left or right associative?
In other words, is it evaluated left to right by Java,
or is it evaluated from the right hand side
to the left hand side?
So pause the video if you need to,
and come back when you're ready.
Welcome back, so did you say
that the assignment operator is right-associative?
In other words, it's evaluated right to left.
If so, you'd be correct.
So in order to assign a value,
in this case, what's in parentheses,
we need to know the value, right?
So Java has to calculate
what is on the right hand side of the equal sign
in order to figure out the value to store
into our variable, kilometres in this case.
All right, so getting back to expressions,
and expression comprises variables, values, and operators.
And all of those are used in this case.
So we've got a variable named kilometres,
we've got literal double values, 100 and 1.609344.
And of course, the operators, the equals
or assignment operator and the multiplication operator.
And as a recap, it's this component
of the line which is the expression.
And by adding the data type and a semi colon,
we're then creating a valid Java statement.
And we'll talk more about Java statements in the next video.
Now, most operators in Java are left-associative,
and we'll just go back to the browser again briefly,
into that same page we were in before.
So as you can see, most of them are left to right.
So in other words, they're evaluated left to right.
So we've got an example there
of the addition and subtraction,
which we talked about in the slides earlier in this video.
They're evaluated left to right.
And there's very few that are actually
evaluated right to left.
You can see down the bottom,
which we talked about in the first column,
but also in the second one,
the ternary conditional operator,
that's also evaluated right to left.
All right, so that's about all
I'm gonna talk about associativity.
It's not something you really
need to memorise or know a lot about.
It's fairly intuitive after you've used it for a while.
And you can always clarify your results
by printing the output, which is a good idea
any time you're testing out your logic
or testing out a theory,
to see what Java returns as an output,
it's always a good idea to clarify and do that.
The more important thing to understand is precedence,
which we talked about in the previous section,
specifically when you're not using parentheses.
And again, we talked about that
in depth in the last section.
So I'll end the video here.
And in the next one, we're gonna discuss statements,
which we've already talked a bit about.
And we'll also then get into white space
indentation of code as well.
So, see you in the next video.